Add documentation for support of APIM 4.x versions (#184)
wso2/docs-mg: en/docs/how-tos/analytics/elk-based-analytics.md

# ELK Based Analytics

!!! note
    Refer to the [compatibility documentation]({{base_path}}/faqs/#compatibility) to confirm the supported update level for this feature.

![Deployment diagram]({{base_path}}/assets/img/how-tos/analytics/elk-based-analytics/architecture.png)

### Analytics Data flow

The new On-Premise Analytics solution for WSO2 API Microgateway will publish analytics data into a log file and that file will be used as the source for the analytics solution.

ELK based WSO2 API Microgateway On-Premise Analytics deployment architecture has 4 main components.

1. Filebeats
2. Logstash
3. Elasticsearch
4. Kibana

This section will cover the steps required to configure the WSO2 API-M and then publish it to an external ELK cluster.

!!! note
    The solution is developed on ELK 8.1.0 and will only be supported in Kibana versions 8.0.0 and higher.

### Step 1 - Configuring API Microgateway

#### Step 1.1 - Configuring the micro-gw.conf file.

Open the &lt;MICRO\_GW\_HOME&gt;/conf/micro-gw.conf file and add the following configuration.

``` toml
[analytics.elkAnalytics]
  enable = true
```

#### Step 1.2 - Enabling Logs

!!! note

>     The LOG4J configuration file `log4j2.properties` is not available in the API Microgateway runtime by default since the logging is carried out by a in-built configuration factory. In order to configure API Microgateway runtime for ELK analytics, create a `log4j2.properties` configuration file in the location &lt;MICRO\_GW\_HOME&gt;/conf/.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The LOG4J configuration file `log4j2.properties` is not available in the API Microgateway runtime by default since the logging is carried out by an in-built configuration factory. In order to configure API Microgateway runtime for ELK analytics, create a `log4j2.properties` configuration file in the location &lt;MICRO\_GW\_HOME&gt;/conf/.
```

Author: Done with https://github.com/wso2/docs-mg/pull/184/commits/50d67d45206cb74d0620e3be7f91ee74c6d8bb38

    appender.APIM_METRICS_APPENDER.layout.type = PatternLayout
    appender.APIM_METRICS_APPENDER.layout.pattern = %d{HH:mm:ss,SSS} [%X{ip}-%X{host}] [%t] %5p %c{1} %m%n
    appender.APIM_METRICS_APPENDER.policies.type = Policies
    appender.APIM_METRICS_APPENDER.policies.time.type = TimeBasedTriggeringPolicy
    appender.APIM_METRICS_APPENDER.policies.time.interval = 1
    appender.APIM_METRICS_APPENDER.policies.time.modulate = true
    appender.APIM_METRICS_APPENDER.policies.size.type = SizeBasedTriggeringPolicy
    appender.APIM_METRICS_APPENDER.policies.size.size=1000MB
    appender.APIM_METRICS_APPENDER.strategy.type = DefaultRolloverStrategy
    appender.APIM_METRICS_APPENDER.strategy.max = 10
    ```

3. Add a reporter to the loggers list:

    ``` properties
    loggers = reporter, ...(list of other available loggers)
    ```

4. Add the following configurations after the loggers:

    ``` properties
    logger.reporter.name = org.wso2.am.analytics.publisher.reporter.elk
    logger.reporter.level = INFO
    logger.reporter.additivity = false
    logger.reporter.appenderRef.APIM_METRICS_APPENDER.ref = APIM_METRICS_APPENDER
    ```

!!! note

>     The `apim_metrics.log` file be rolled each day or when the log size reaches the limit of 1000 MB by default. Furthermore, only 10 revisions will be kept and older revisions will be deleted automatically. You can change these configurations by updating the configurations provided in step 2 given above this section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The `apim_metrics.log` file will be rolled each day or when the log size reaches the limit of 1000 MB by default. Furthermore, only 10 revisions will be kept and older revisions will be deleted automatically. You can change these configurations by updating the configurations provided in step 2 above.
```

Author: Done with https://github.com/wso2/docs-mg/pull/184/commits/50d67d45206cb74d0620e3be7f91ee74c6d8bb38

!!! note
    Following are the details that are available on analytics log events:

>     `apim_event_response` -  This event will be triggered for each successful API invocation. When a API associated backend returns an error    response still it will be logged through this event.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    `apim_event_response` -  This event will be triggered for each successful API invocation. When an API associated backend returns an error response, it will also be logged through this event.
```

Author: Done with https://github.com/wso2/docs-mg/pull/184/commits/50d67d45206cb74d0620e3be7f91ee74c6d8bb38

        beats {
            port => 5044
        }
    }

    filter {
        grok {
            match => ["message", "%{GREEDYDATA:UNWANTED}\ apimMetrics:%{GREEDYDATA:apimMetrics}\, %{GREEDYDATA:UNWANTED} \:%{GREEDYDATA:properties}"]
        }
        json {
            source => "properties"
        }
    }
    output {
        if [apimMetrics] == " apim:response" {
            elasticsearch {
                hosts => ["http://{ELK_URL}:9200"]
                index => "apim_event_response"
                user => "elastic"
                password => "Admin1234"
            }
        } else if [apimMetrics] == " apim:faulty" {
            elasticsearch {
                hosts => ["http://{ELK_URL}:9200"]
                index => "apim_event_faulty"
                user => "elastic"
                password => "Admin1234"
            }
        }
    }
    ```

#### Installing Kibana

1. [Install Kibana](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/kibana/8.1/install.html#_install_kibana_yourself) according to your operating system.

2. [Launch](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/kibana/8.1/access.html#log-on-to-the-web-application) the Kibana web interface.

3. Log in to the Kibana dashboards.

> 4. Navigate to Stack Management > index pattern. If you already have any index patterns created under the following names, delete them before importing the saved artifacts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Navigate to Stack Management > index pattern. If you already have any index pattern created under the following names, delete them before importing the saved artifacts.
```

Author: This sentence is continued implying having multiple patterns (Referred to as "delete them" next line). Is there a reason to change this?

Author: Done with https://github.com/wso2/docs-mg/pull/184/commits/9971bd66c89b08168724a05788aba122e0886d99

6. Navigate to **Stack Management** > **Saved Object** and click on **Import**. Add the downloaded artifact file as an import object, and import

!!! info
    Follow the recommendations of Elastic in order to optimize the performance of the system.

### Dashboards

#### Analyzing statistics

Once you have set up the Kibana dashboards, you can access the following dashboards.

##### Overview

The Overview page gives you a quick overview of the performance of the system. It can be used as a dashboard to view the current system status.

![Overview chart]({{base_path}}/assets/img/how-tos/analytics/elk-based-analytics/overview.png)

##### Traffic
The Traffic page shows information related to the traffic that goes through your API management deployments. This includes API usage, application usage, resource usage, etc. You can use this page to investigate the usage of APIs and applications, traffic patterns, etc.

![Traffic chart 1]({{base_path}}/assets/img/how-tos/analytics/elk-based-analytics/traffic1.png)

![Traffic chart 2]({{base_path}}/assets/img/how-tos/analytics/elk-based-analytics/traffic2.png)

##### API Analytics

> The API Analytics Dashboard provides business insights on APIs enabling users to take proactive actions to improve profitability and the quality of the service provided. This dashboard focuses on API developers who wish to see the analytics related to their APIs. This dashboard includes graphs to represent,  Overall API Usage,  Top 10 API and Application creators, API Usage by version, application, resource path and backend.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The API Analytics Dashboard provides business insights on APIs enabling users to take proactive actions to improve profitability and the quality of the service provided. This dashboard focuses on API developers who wish to see the analytics related to their APIs. This dashboard includes graphs to represent, overall API usage, top 10 API and Application creators, API usage by version, application, resource path and backend.
```

Author: Done with https://github.com/wso2/docs-mg/pull/184/commits/50d67d45206cb74d0620e3be7f91ee74c6d8bb38

![API analytics chart 1]({{base_path}}/assets/img/how-tos/analytics/elk-based-analytics/api-analytics-1.png)

![API analytics chart 2]({{base_path}}/assets/img/how-tos/analytics/elk-based-analytics/api-analytics-2.png)

##### User Analytics

> User Analytics dashboard provides insights of API Users, most API Users, No of success and fault requests by users for each API and application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
User Analytics dashboard provides insights of API Users, most API Users, number of success and fault requests by users for each API and application
```

##### Errors

The Errors page shows information related to erroneous API calls that are received by your system. The errors are categorized based on the error type. You can further drill down using the error subtypes. Use this page as the starting point for debugging any API errors.

![Errors chart]({{base_path}}/assets/img/how-tos/analytics/elk-based-analytics/errors.png)

##### Latency

The Latency page shows information related to the latency of API calls within the API management deployment. You can view a summary of the slowest APIs and then drill down into the API view for further analysis. Use this page as a starting point to debug API slowness.

![Latency chart 1]({{base_path}}/assets/img/how-tos/analytics/elk-based-analytics/latency1.png)

![Latency chart 2]({{base_path}}/assets/img/how-tos/analytics/elk-based-analytics/latency2.png)

##### Cache
The Cache page shows statistics that indicate the efficiency with which response caching is carried out for the requests sent to your APIs.

![Cache chart]({{base_path}}/assets/img/how-tos/analytics/elk-based-analytics/cache.png)

##### Devices

> The Devices page displays information about operating systems and HTTP agents that end users use to invoke the APIs. You can use this page to get an idea of the distribution of your user base and improve your APIs to match the audience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Devices page displays information about operating systems and HTTP agents that end-users use to invoke the APIs. You can use this page to get an idea of the distribution of your user base and improve your APIs to match the audience.
```
